# Quantum-Resistant Encrypted Chat
This quantum resistant prototype demonstrates 2-party encrypted messaging using Kyber, a post-cryptography encapsulation key, and Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). In this case, the 2 parties are Alice and Bob. One person sends a message then the program encrypts the message. Then the other party will decrypt the message using the secret shared key. The simulation is executed 3 times because it iterates through 3 of the Kyber variants to 
securely establish a shared key.


## Project Overview
- Utiliezed the Kyber key encapsulation mechansim for secure key exchange.
- Implements 3 variants of Kyber to evaulate and compare the security and processing time.
- Implements AES to generate a 256-bit shared AES key. 

## Project Structure and Logic

### Message Exchange Process
1. An option appears to choose whether Bob or Alice is the sender 
2. If ‘Alice’ is inputted: 
- Alice inputs a message  
- Alice's message gets encrypted using the shared AES key  
- The encrypted message is converted from the raw encrypted bytes to hexadecimal, then decoded to convert the byte object to a regular string.
- Displays the encrypted and decrypted versions of Alice’s message.
3. If ‘Bob’ is inputted 
- Bob sends a message.
- Bob’s message gets encrypted using the shared AES key.  
- The encrypted message is converted from the raw encrypted bytes to hexadecimal, then decoded to convert the byte object to a regular string.
- Displays the encrypted and decrypted versions of Bob’s message.

### Key Exchange Process
1. A shared secret is generated using a random 256-bit AES key using HKDF with 
SHA-256 
2. A Kyber key pair is generated 
3. Records the time it took for Kyber key generation  
4. The shared AES key is encapsulated using the public key  
5. Records the time it took for the encapsulation process 
6. The private key is used to decapsulate the shared AES key 
7. Records the time it took for the decapsulation process 
8. Verifies that the encapsulated and decapsulated shared AES key have the same value 
9. Displays the time spent on key generation, encapsulation, and decapsulation in seconds 
10. Displays the ciphertext and shared key size in bytes 


### Encryption Process
1. Generates a random 16-byte Intialization Vector to prevent identical ciphertexts.
2. Uses the Cipher module to create the encryption engine.
3. Encrypts the ciphertext generated by the Kyber key using AES encyrption mechanism.
4. Utilizes Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) to chain encrypted blocks together using the Intialization Vector to add randomness.
5. Uses the default backend as the cryptographic engine to preform low-level cryptographic operations efficiently.
6. Creates a PKCS7 padder adn pads the message to a 128-bit block length to make the plaintext the correct size for block encryption.
7. Encrypts the padded message using the AES encryption context.


### Decryption Process
1. Uses the Cipher module to create the decryption engine.
2. Decrypts the encrypted message using the AES decryption context.
3. Unpads the decrypted message to remove the extra bytes that were added during padding so the orginal plaintext message can be recovered.
4. Converts the unpadded message to a plaintext UTF-8 string.

## How to Run
Be in the root directory
### Prerequisites
```bash
git clone https://github.com/hhemen101/AIM-PQC-Projects.git
```
```bash
python "AIM-PQC-Projects\Quantum-Resistant Encrypted Chat\Kyber.py"
```

## Technologies used  

### Cryptography.io: 
- Utilized the hazmat subpackage from the cryptography library 
- Employed AES encryption - used the Cipher, algorithm, and modes modules.
- Applied PKCS7 padding - used the padding module.
- Used the HKDF and hashes modules.
- Imported the default_backend from hazmat.backends.

### Kyber (ML_KEM):
- Utilized for secure key exchange.
- Implemented 3 security levels - Kyber512, Kyber768, and Kyber 1024. 
- kyber.py - imported the 3 Kyber variants.

### Python libraries
- os library - utilized to generate 16 bytes of secure random data for the Initialization 
Vector 
- time library - used to record the time taken for key generation, encapsulation, and 
decapsulation process 
- binascii library - used to convert the ciphertext from binary to hexadecimal format


## Key Findings
- Kyber1024 - maximum security with a greater ciphertext size, but slower processing time.
- Kyber768 - moderate performance and security.
- Kyber512 - fastest key generation, encapsulation, and decapsulation time, but at the cost of reduced security margins.

## Benefits of combining post-quantum cryptography with symmetric encryption: 
- Hybrid strength - ensures comprehensive security over various cryptographic algorithms 
- Multi-layered defense - if one layer of the PQC implementation is attacked, symmetric 
encryption still protects the actual data 
- Allows for a smooth transition to quantum-safe protocols - can easily integrate PQC into 
symmetric encryption-based systems 
- Forward Secrecy - ensures past communications remain secure even if encryption keys 
are compromised in the future 